And the length of these tours is brought about by
the human element of our society,
the softness in which we live. Okay. Okay. I want to
talk about another issue as far as the man is
concerned, and you've already mentioned this.
I'd like your comment on it, maybe a change from
your first tour to your— when you return in your
command and that is by 1970 and the early 1970s in
the press there were a number of stories about
drugs, about enlisted men who didn't want to fight
and who wouldn't follow the officers and about
fragging. Maybe these things were blown up. I
don't know. I'd like your opinion. Do you have
examples? I
read a lot about that before I went back on my second
tour
in August of 1971. I read a lot about it. And we had
three
or more divisions left over there. When I was asked
to come back by General Abrams because of some
failures at the DMZ and also Firebase Barry Ann
down in the Miracle Division and some failures on
the Cambodian border which caused the relief of a
general officer that I later replaced,
I found no fragging incidences. I did send one
battery of artillery people home because I found
them on marijuana one day and they weren't able to
fire their weapons on the DMZ, so I just
deactivated that unit. What happened to those
soldiers? They shipped them home. What kind of
discharge is it? I don't have any idea. I don't have
any idea. Did they ship them home and discharge
them? I don't have any idea what happened to them.
Who was in charge? I warned them out of the theater.
Who was in charge? There was a captain. What
happened to him? I have no idea what happened to
him. Did he go back, too? They all went back to the
States. They were scheduled for deactivation
within a month or two months anyway to go back home,
and when I found them totally ineffective because
of the drug, I just said, out, and that's what
happened. I found no fragging instances. I can
tell you this, that all
sort of things happen to soldiers and to civilians
if they're in a place in which they're
dissatisfied and they're not properly occupied.
and no one is providing them adventure or a
challenge, they'll go make it for themselves. And
when they're in an area outside of their own
habitat of the United States, in a foreign
country, as far as they're concerned, nobody can
see them, and you can't tell what the hell they're
liable to come up with. And that's exactly what has
happened. The policy of the United States was
conduct the war, don't kill any enemy, and don't
get killed yourself. So what does a general or a
colonel do under that sort of situation? He sits on
his hands. And one with a
burning desire to succeed, and understand all
these problems and been through them before, he
will create an ingenious way in leadership of
keeping these men occupied and doing something in
order to provide them some adventure and
challenge. And I want to tell you that it isn't an
easy task at all. Those elements wasn't provided
to these men. They had nothing to do in a foreign
country. And we're going to get into something.
And that's what happens many times. It's not the
first time it's happened, but I never saw it
rampant at all. In Vietnam? In Vietnam, yes.
Never. And a good comparison was that the first
division in the 15 months I was with it won AWOL.
People were doing something 24 hours a day.
When I came back, that was in 1966 and 67. I came back
in 71 and 72,
and apparently, as a matter of fact, I was back
there too. more or less, corral all of these evil
things that was going on and sort them out and get
people sorted out.
And I found just what I've explained,
the high command from
the presidential the Congress, Department of
Defense, and the State Department conduct that
war, don't get anybody killed, and don't kill any
enemy. And by God, what in the hell kind of war is
that and what do you do? And the soldier says, why in
the hell am I over here? And I agree with the
soldier. Did you have men come up to you, or
enlisted, or officers, and say, General, why am I
here? I never had one ask me. He didn't have to
because I told him why he was there. I told him he was
there because our government wanted us here in
order to, because it felt that way, and we're going
to support the government, and we're going to do it
the best we could, and whether you liked it or not,
that was beside the damn point.
And they never asked me, but in my heart I knew that
they, uh,
you want to let us fight, is what
I'm for. And we were sending them home pretty fast
then anyway. Yeah, right. I was wondering about
another issue, which was some controversy. Of
course, we lost the war and Some people say, well,
we didn't use the right strategy. And then they
say, Westmoreland strategy, well, one part of the
strategy was search and destroy. Using that
tactic to go out in the field and search and destroy
the enemy. And then, of course, there was the
accountability. How do you measure progress in a
war like this? And one measure was the body count.
And that's come under a lot of criticism. First,
what do you think about search and destroy?
Search and destroy in a very inefficient way and a
very costly way of
conducting a war against insurgency.
Sir Robert Thompson, advisor to President
Nixon, and I
totally agree that
to stop insurgency from one country to the other,
you go after the base, the base of the insurgency.
You go after North Vietnam and totally destroy it,
eliminate it. You don't need any search and
destroy.
We also agree that we destroyed, and I had a major
hand in this, in destroying the offensive
capability of General Giep.
At the time of victory for the United States,
our home base collapsed.
The United States collapsed and wiped away
victory. Our Congress, our president, our
government, our administration, our people
collapsed.
at the time of victory. Sir Robert Thompson
could see that very clearly.
Their base never collapsed. Their base was never
attacked. They never came to a peace term until
they got 11 days of B-52s day and night in November
and December of 1972. Then they went to the peace
table. which should give the world an indication
of how you fight insurgency. I wanted to blow the
dams and drown about two million of them plus all
their rice fields and starve them out. It's war.
Never
happened. Johnson came over and apparently
talked to Westmoreland about What do you need to go
north? And Westmoreland wanted another quarter
of a million men, so Johnson goes back and McNamara
and the rest of them throw her a laird, I guess,
throw up their hands. They just can't do that. We
didn't need another quarter of a million men. We
needed B-52s 24 hours around the clock, and every
tactical fighter bomber that we had in the
business 24 hours a day around the clock and after
we had bombed them to shreds for about 30 to 60 days
land the 82nd airborne and 101st air mobile or the
first big red one air mobile over there and it was
all over with did we do that no the great affluency
here and the and the leftist elements in this
country denied a frightened administration of
Congress to face these problems with common sense
and sound judgment.
That's what it's all about. The American people
did it to themselves. The soldiers, the sailors
and the airmen, were really and truly the finest I
have ever seen in anybody's Army, Navy, or Air
Force or Marine Corps anywhere in the world. They
were absolutely phenomenal.
And I just can't say too much for them. They never
lost a battle, as far as I'm concerned. I can't
think of one that they ever lost.
And they were in some tough ones and in a war which is
best described by not a front line anywhere, but
the war was 360 degrees. In front of you, behind
you, all around you. Whether you were an
individual or a division or a battalion or a
company or what it is, the war was all around you.
Now that is peculiar and unusual to our way of
warfare in this country or any other country in the
world. It's always been before all the good guys on
one side of the line and all the bad guys on the other
side. And you shoot at each other back and forth.
That's not the way it was in this war in Vietnam and
counterinsurgency. This was a very demanding
thing that required not looking in one direction
but totally all the way around. That is another
thing that contributed to the hardship on the
soldier and the officer. What kind of strategy do
you think that we should have had to fight this type
of 360-degree war? Go after the base. Go after the
base, North Vietnam. Don't deploy any divisions
in South Vietnam. Go take the base out. Take it all
out. All the support out. Take out the
sanctuaries. Can you imagine me having
instructions issued that if I'm fired on from
Cambodia, I cannot return the fire? And I said, you
go to hell. And I was standing with General
Prilliman on the Cambodian border in Tainan
Province in a small stream, maybe 20 meters, that
ran down between Cambodia and Tainan Province.
And
General Prilliman, Lieutenant Colonel then, who
commanded 2nd Infantry, was moving along. found a
lot of supply bases just inside Cambodia, many
more on the other side, policy where we weren't
allowed to fire over there. And I was standing
talking to him when the small arms fire broke out,
killed his radio operator, and wounded another
man there near us. And I said, Dick, Let's get some
artillery fire on these bastards. He said, sir,
we're not permitted to fire over there. I grabbed
the radio from the dead soldier and called
artillery fire on them over there until I felt that
I'd killed every one of them. And it wasn't 24 hours
until it came from the President of the United
States back
to McVie, who has violated the no firing into
Cambodia. Prince Suenok had reported to the
President of the United States, the United States
State Department, that they had been fired on.
Well, the First Division was operating out there.
Division Commander General Depew got called to
find
out who it was that was firing. First Division was
the only one in Tainan Province operating on the
Cambodian border.
He didn't know what they wanted, so he went back and
about. He called me and he said,
You were in charge of all the maneuver and fire and
everything? I said, yeah, that's right, sir. He
said, apparently one of our units had fired into
Cambodia. I said,
well, what's the circumstances? He said, well,
political authorities in Phnom Penh has relayed
to the United States and the President has asked
Comments McVie to give him a report on this and find
out who it is that violated the policy.
The outcome of this was, I said, I fired into
Cambodia.
I said,
I was standing with Dick Preliman, yesterday
afternoon talking to him when the fire came in and
killed his radio operator and wounded another
man. And the fire continued to come in. And I said,
uh, I asked Dick to get some fire going back and he
said the policy was that, uh, which I knew was that,
uh, uh, He couldn't fire over there. I did this
because it was his command. It was his battalion.
And I wanted him to run his battalion, but he
couldn't do that because he was following the
policy. So I took the radio, adjusted the
artillery there. And I want to say this, that I'm
ready to call a national press
and make it known to the world that I do not intend to
have a United States soldier wounded or killed by
enemy fire from Cambodia and me not fire back
and if they want to send another boy out here in my
place go right ahead but I'll be damned if I'm gonna
Allow American soldiers to be shot, wounded, and
killed from fire from some sanctuary, and me,
allow them to get by with that.
I'll put that blood on somebody else's hands, not
my own. What did the general say? He went back to
Colonel McVeigh. Did he agree with you? He agreed.
He always agreed. He's a hell of a, most of the time,
I guess, he's a hell of a great guy, smart as hell. He
understand clearly he'd been in combat during
World War II. He knew what it was all about. He knew
people. And lo and behold, the policy changed the
next day. Do not pursue, but return fire if you're
shot at. That's what I did.
Policy was changed.
So that's the sort of stuff he put up. crap you got to
put up with all political all gimmickry
bureaucratic gimmickry politically all
political stuff here in a democracy that's what
you have to live with what'd
you think of westmoreland
well west a
uh um
ran for governor after he retired,
so he must have some political aspirations.
He treated me
well while I was over there.
He respected the fact that I was a combat leader,
and that's all you have to do, and I guess that's all
you can ask for. so you can discount any other
things that you might hear or see or do. As long as
the top guy respects you for what you are and is a
combat leader, then you've made the grade, you
see. So I have no comment to make about him at all,
except that he did run for
governor back here, Maybe he had some political
ambitions all along. As a matter of fact, how can
you be a four-star general and dealing with an
ambassador every day and dealing with a president
of a foreign country every day and at the same time
be a combat leader every day?
So I got no criticism of Westy at all. How well did
you know him? Well, he used to visit with me almost
every other day or so. And he'd come out when he was
going to call off somebody of higher authority
between the division, say the corps commander or
the field force commander, but had already
convinced Westy that he ought to change the course
of action or he ought to stop this operation and go
do something else and so forth. He's come out and
visited me and reversed the corps commander. So he
took your opinion? Absolutely.
And that happened many times. Will you compare him
with Abrams who took over in 1968? Well, you'd have
to say General Westmoreland was a boy scout and
General Abrams was a combat fighting soldier.
Well tell me more. Well that's about it.
Experience-wise,
there's no comparison. General Abrams had, as I
said earlier, been a very successful tank leader
during World War II. As I mentioned, there were two
of us, Abrams and myself. He'd been very
successful. He'd been very successful at
peacetime as a commander, and he commanded combat
command in the armored division and commanded the
division. And he was a tough guy, smart,
got things done, highly respected. And the two
people are just totally different
personalities. As I say, one was a boy scout,
immaculate, everything just perfect and so on and
forth. That's not a good, rough, tough, brawling
type commander that gets in and faces a cold steel
battle, you see. Westie had never had that kind of
experience.
Abrams had. How'd you get along with Abrams?
I guess he, best compliment he ever paid me, I was in
the hospital when I'd lost his eye. When he said,
he said, I want you to get out of here, I'm going to
give you a, another command, and I said, well...
And he said you were going to Korea. He said, you're
going to Korea, and I said, well, I don't know
whether I'll have a one eye or not, and he said, you
son of a bitch, I'd rather have you with one eye, and
most of these bastards were three.
I loved him. We've been very close all of our lives.
We had a battalion commander to tell you about,
Abe.
We had a battalion commander, and he had a
battalion commander in the 4th Army Division
named Pat Hyde. Pat
was a diabetic, and he stole his way overseas
during World War II. He had a class of 40 at West
Point. And Pat was doing well over there and was a
battalion commander and his wife would send him
insulin in a cake and stuff, you know. Every week
they'd send him a cake during the war and baked in
the cake was insulin so nobody knew what was going
on. He didn't have to be in the war. Well, old Pat did
a hell of a job and we served together after the war.
He was in the 4th Armored Division with Abe. I was in
the 2nd, of course. And Pat died on us after the war.
They kind of forced him out. He died. I
was at West Point and Abe came up and
stayed with me and Mrs. H in our house.
And we had a neighbor from across the street
So, this neighbor was Colonel Purdy, also a friend
of
Colonel Pat Hyde. Abrams and I, he was so dedicated
and so
respectful of what Pat Hyde had done as a
commander. battalion commander in his unit in
Fourth Armored had been doing World War II that we
set up the entire night and talked about what Pat
had done and what others had done and what many had
failed to do. And
we, in addition to that, consumed considerable
amount of beverage and never went to sleep that
night and got up the next day and
took good care of Pat Hyde and putting him away. He
was a hell of a guy. So Abram was a personable sort of
fella and but officially he's a real tough fella
also. from the standpoint of standards and
requiring everybody to do everything right. Of
course, I believe in that thoroughly and I think
that's one of the things that created a closeness
between the two of us. Do you think that it would
have made much difference in the war if Abrams
would have been that first commander from 64 to 68
instead of Westmoreland?
I have no doubt that there would have been a
difference.
But whether the political
side of our country and the people would have
allowed General
Abrams to do what he knew that was necessary to win,
and that was to go north and take the base, I don't
know. I could only speculate on that.
The way he believed in air power, and the way I
believe in air power,
I don't need many divisions if I've got the freedom
of my air power.
I think we had more than enough divisions if the
politicians
and the people in this country would have
permitted us to use our power, our air power and our
own ground power and Navy power. We could have
eliminated that conflict over there, not in eight
years, but somewhere between 30 and 90 days.
Somewhere between 30 and 90 days. And how would you
have done it? I would attack the North and bomb them
into submission. And where would you have to have?
I would then have landed safely all over the place
because there wouldn't have been any resistance
left. I tore totally their military capability.
Not civilians. but I'm talking about their
military capabilities, their training bases,
their units, their divisions, their
organizations, their supply dumps, their
ammunition dumps.
Totally destroyed them, totally eliminated
them, totally eliminated the capability for them
to receive anymore.
What about the fear that politicians have that
maybe China or the Soviet Union will respond?
General Patton told me one time, don't ever worry
about your damn flanks. Swear for the objective.
And if you allow your flanks to interfere with you,
they'll never take your objective. And he's 100%
right. China wants to come in, just tell them I'm
going to have to nuke hell out of you, baby. So if you
want to come into this, I'm going to nuke hell out of
you because I don't have enough ground forces here
to cover you convincingly, and you ought to know
that. So you get in it, and I'm going to nuke hell out
of you. What do you think they're going to do?
They're going to say, Jesus Christ, them son of a
bitches mean business, and we better stay the hell
away from them.
What about the problem that we didn't, that the
Congress never, and the President too, never
considered this a war. They always considered it a
conflict, and LBJ never took a declaration of war.
I mean, you just can't invade a country without a
declaration of war, can you? Well, we were still
operating under a national emergency from Korea.
That had never been called off. So, he wasn't
totally incorrect in his not declaring a national
emergency, but let me tell you what happens, and
I'll describe to you what happens in case you do,
want to declare a national emergency. Stacked in
the Pentagon, and I used to have responsibility
for a large share of it, it must be 10 feet high of
emergency legislation
that the moment you declare a national emergency
is submitted to the Congress,
that legislation will even cut down the amount of
fuel that you put in your lawnmower.
and your automobile and your lights, that
legislation will stop the total progress of this
country from the standpoint of doing what you want
to do.
And
that wasn't necessary.
And as I said, it wasn't necessary to call up the
reserves either. It wasn't that much of a problem
if you had gone about it to win it and kept the
politicians out of it
and let the military get it over with by going after
the base from which they operated. We didn't do
that. We have got to learn to go fight these wars and
won in the Middle East without being totally
disruptive to our society and our society on the
other hand has got to respect this and quit and to
come off of their leftist
disinterest and lackadaisical attitude about
what is of national interest to the United States
of America and their welfare.
And I don't know when that's going to come.
But we can't be disruptive to the United States
because we're going to go over and
stop Soviet from taking Saudi Arabia and Kuwait
and Bahrain and Iraq Israel. We don't need that
much, we don't need total mobilization in this
country, three years of mobilization and
disruptive of life here.
We need to selectively go about this. What kind of
progress you make if you take all of the reserve
officers out of the school system here in the
Dallas-Fort Worth area?
And all the doctors.
and many, many more. Some of the critics have said
that one of the problems with this war is that we
were trying to win the hearts and minds of the
people. That was one of the policies. In the South,
yeah, we were using such massive firepower, which
you've already spoken of. We were using such
massive firepower that we were too dependent on
technology. Do you think that we were too
dependent on technology? Not at all. First place,
out where the firepower was being used, there
wasn't any civilians out there. They'd been
killed off and destroyed 20 years before by a
communist element. And firepower is the cheapest
way to go. You use firepower instead of expending
American soldiers. American soldiers, he's a
person. He's people. He belongs to someone
important in the United States. He's important
himself. You don't want to expend the important
part of America against the cheap part of
communism. Under communism, people are cheap.
Weapons and materialistic things are very
important because they're atheist beliefs. But
in American way of life, and in my belief in
Americans, is that people are important. and that
the cheap part of it, they're made by the grace of
God. Bombs and artillery pieces and firepower,
that's all made by hand, and that's cheap stuff.
You can make it in the back end of anybody's garage
in many instances. So why use the important part of
America, pit the important part of America
against the cheap part of communism? That is the
American soldier against their soldier. Let's
pit our cheap part of America against the cheap
part of communism. Let them have the firepower.
That's the way I see it. What did you think of the
quality of the Vietnamese as far as fighters were
concerned? You mean the South Vietnamese? Yes.
They'd been at war for twenty years
and their leaders were getting tired of those that
hadn't been killed. And after you've been wounded
about 10 times or more in 20 years of war, the
incentive to go get killed with 11th time is not
very great. And that's a very interesting thing. I
think that might be true in the case of America
also.
I hope that answered your question on that one.
good units and there were bad ones, but after
twenty years, you know,
you get pretty tired. Well, the North Vietnamese
had also been at war for that amount of time, yeah.
They, for the most part, were on the offensive.
Yep. What did you think of— On the offensive, the
offensive had a—the offensive it's a sort of thing
that provides adventure and challenge and
there's not much adventure into being on the
defensive and being kidnapped and clocked and
trying to defend yourself so it's an attitudinal
sort of thing and in addition to that I have to
compliment the communists
in their products Now, maybe their methods of
attaining it are not so— are attaining the highest
spree
and the dedication that the communist soldier
has. I don't—maybe not condone some of their
methods or any of their methods for attaining that
within an individual, but they do it better than
anybody I know of. You've got to give them credit
for it. and they make a little guy very tenacious.
But if you've got a person that's
born in the hardship, raised in the hardship,
trained to be a fighter in the hardship,
That has one hell of a motivation
in building tenacity
in the individual
towards surviving. You said earlier in this
interview that you respected the German soldier
even though you beat him. Did you respect the
Vietnamese enemy and General Guillem?
I respected him as a soldier, but I didn't think he
was so great as everybody else thought he might be.
Because when he came down conventionally for the
first time, I destroyed him without American
ground troops. I destroyed him totally with
tactical air power and Vietnamese and a handful of
American advisors
and American air power.
He should have been able to foresee
after looking at capability of Americans to put in
firepower, or the American availability of
firepower,
he should have been able to made a better judgment
than he did. So, I respect him as a soldier, but
he had no damn business of trying to set up his
southern governmental headquarters in my area,
in my ballpark. So he's pretty stupid as far as I'm
concerned. Now, he might have done that in
somebody else's ballpark, but not mine.
Maybe he didn't respect the enemy. I don't think he
did. He knew who I was, though. He did? Oh, yeah. How
do you know? Oh, they monitor you. When you're in
the clear on the radio, they'll come up on your net,
and they'll call you by your call sign, when you're
in the clear on the clear net. Did he mention you in
his memoirs? I don't remember. No, I don't know
whether he did or not. He probably didn't want to
talk about that. If I was him, I wouldn't want to
talk about that one at all. Because he just lost his
ass. Every damn tank he had in a matter of eight or
nine hours. Most of them never even got a chance to
fire one round of ammunition.
Not one round of ammunition.
Let's talk about the press. A lot of people, we
talked a little bit about this yesterday when I was
leaving. A lot of people say that the press should
not have been allowed to come into Vietnam because
they spectacularized the war. that they had their
own purposes. This is the first televised war in
American history, and it had a profound impact on
the society, watching that every single night.
Tell me about your relations with the press. How
did you get along with them? Do you think they were
accurate in reporting over your feelings? I think
a lot depended on the individual. I...